---
title: That Time I Failed to Archive Back Matter
author: Katie Anne Martinez 
editor: Kayley Cassidy
images: Montse Marti
web: Elijah Ager Luckett
---

## A reflection on the fragility of digital archives

Encountering data loss is routine in my day-to-day work as a digital archivist in The New School Archives. I haven’t forgotten about the external hard drive with a decade of program history kept in an office drawer since the early 2000s, expired and no longer functioning by the time it reached our department. The boxes upon boxes of CDs and zip drives containing file formats made with long-obsolete software. A panicked email about an exhibition website that unexpectedly appeared as a 404 page. The factors that cause data decay and erasure seem to multiply and morph each year as our networked world takes on newer, more sophisticated forms. Perhaps in an effort to heal my own professional anxieties on the topic, I joined the Creative Publishing and Critical Journalism program this spring with the intention of exploring how the disappearance of records in a fragile digital landscape impacts documentation of the past and, as a result, our collective memory. 

Back Matter, a digital and print magazine with a publishing style that is impermanent by design, illustrates the sort of built-in ephemerality that complicates the preservation of current digital media. Each annual issue is created as a microsite with a unique visual identity. The subscription-based web hosting ends sometime after the academic year, at which point the site is removed from the live web. Time-restrictive project sites like this are common across the university and represent a substantial category of New School history that is at risk, or already gone. Even archival intervention can sometimes only mitigate this vulnerability to a degree, as in the case of Back Matter. Several of the issues could not be preserved with the leading web archiving software, Archive-It, developed by the Internet Archive, which would have created a copy that remains playable in the Wayback Machine. 

In the process of attempting to archive the first five issues, I discovered that some of the site builders employed (e.g. Readymag and Cargo Collective) had been classified by the Internet Archive as a known web archiving challenge because of their support for constructing “dynamic web content,” a coding style that has emerged in recent years. This content is characterized as interactive pages with elements that change or appear with user  behavior, such as hovering over a point to reveal a menu, clicking an image to transform it into another object, and engaging with other playful interface features. This is a departure from the predictability of static HTML pages which are typically scrolled from top to bottom with clicks that simply lead to linked pages. The qualities of dynamic web content define nearly every social media platform, from Instagram to X, as well as many other widely used web-publishing applications, like Google Sites. 

In Issue 5, designed with Cargo Collective, the landing page originally displayed a looped, moving image as the background, with links to each article appearing as movable icons mimicking the functionality of a computer desktop. An emulation of the version archived with the Internet Archive’s Archive-It has a collapsed menu that does not open and the icons are missing entirely, preventing any path to the magazine articles.

When the Archive-It support staff could not determine why the captures continued to crash, I used web-browser plugins to make screen recordings and PDFs of the pages, and then cataloged the files in The New School Archives’ digital collections. This low-tech option might be compared to the documentation of a museum exhibition in the form of floor plans, photography, and videography. The room, the art hung on the walls, the wall text, and the experience of a visitor at the museum exhibition cannot be stored in an acid-free box, but visual, oral, and written evidence of it can be used to understand the presentation. These materials could even provide a blueprint to resurrect it. Our records do not capture the underlying technology of the published issue, but they do provide a record that might not otherwise exist. 

There are nearly always technological gaps between  what we create digitally and how it can be preserved, especially in relation to the iterative and mutable world of web development. In 2025, I learned about the release of a new platform developed to archive dynamic websites, called Browsertrix. While this would have been helpful during my efforts to capture Back Matter, preservation software created by and for archivists can be niche, expensive, and take years to have wide adoption in the community, necessitating approaches that fall outside of defined standards. Solutions like the one devised for Back Matter can bridge these periods and create what might be called a derivative record.

One of my favorite examples of this in The New School Archives is from the university’s first “cyberspace campus,” Distance Instruction for Adult Learners (DIAL), launched in 1994. Internet Archive did not start crawling websites for another two years, and it wasn’t until 2001 that the Wayback Machine was made available to the public with these early snapshots. Much of the content is missing, but you can view an approximation of DIAL. 

Along with these pioneering web captures, The New School Archives has design files created for the DIAL site, ca. 1999, that were transferred to us in 2008 on floppy disks by the former Director of Online Learning, Christina (Tina) Yagjian. The dozens of JPEGs in this collection include webpage mock-ups, logos, icons, and other elements that paint a picture of early web development. 

Back Matter and DIAL, two web-based works produced at The New School nearly thirty years apart, are examples of archival copies of websites that are not in the standard web archive format (WARC or WACZ), but still provide a detailed record. As long as tools for creating high-quality preservation files for websites remain esoteric and time intensive to learn and execute, archivists and creators can compile documentation of the layout and functionality of projects along with any embedded content to convey the original interactive, online experience. This package can then be donated to The New School Archives long after the live version has been removed from the web. 

Forming collaborative relationships earlier in the archiving process to come up with solutions that do not rely solely on the archivist, ranging from high-fidelity captures to low-tech screen recordings, can slow the rate at which digital work tends to disappear. One key difference in digital archives in comparison to analog records that I’ve come to recognize in my role at The New School Archives is the accession process—how we receive collections from donors. Where paper records are delivered in boxes to our office (or picked up during the occasional house call), there is an increasing reliance on the expertise of the digital archivist to extract records from proprietary platforms and networks. 

Speaking as a creator, I understand why. As much as I may want to look back at DMs on Instagram with a former crush, it can feel like an overwhelming task to deter mine how to save the exchanges. Instead, over the years, we allow our conversations, photos, party invitations, and other records of sentiment to perish with old email accounts, discontinued social networks, and cell phone trade-ins. Returning to Back Matter, the archiving process doesn’t have to be perfect or highly technical. Sometimes screenshots are enough. [[Left: We may be decades ahead of  the days when students first began creating digitally with rainbow-colored Macs at The New School, and yet, we’re still inventing what it means to form digital archives.]]
