---
title: Our Collective C.R.A.P.
author: Aliyah Mansur
editor: Katelyn Kimberlin
images: Montse Marti & Elijah Ager Luckett
web: Elijah Ager Luckett
---

## Hard drives, screenshots, and the importance of keeping a journal 

Right now there are 12,735 photos, videos, and screenshots in my phone, the oldest of which are from May 2018. Any photos from the approximately ten years between childhood and then are spread across Facebook, Instagram, and an external hard drive that I’ve probably destroyed via neglect and poor filing hygiene.

Katie Martinez, the associate director of digital archives at The New School, recently informed me of something that I was both horrified by and horrified to have only just found out—hard drives have expiration dates. And not the kind you can ignore based on a sniff test, like something from the back of your fridge. This is only one of many reasons I’m worried about younger generations’ reliance on digital means vof creating and storing the everyday objects that tell the story of our lives. 

Archivists are also worried about our current overuse of digital storage. Or more accurately, they’re worried about what it means for conveying the current moment to future historians. Digital memorabilia is surprisingly hard to preserve, making a digital dark age—a gap in records, artifacts, and ephemera created by reliance on digital tools without proper digital archiving—a present reality. “We’re losing so much,” Martinez said, in regard to the mindset that a digital dark age is a future problem. Because historians of the future will have so little to go off of with few surviving materials from our present time, a digital dark age is technically a problem for the future, but it’s one we can avoid by making changes now. [[left: The exponential volume and rapid obsolescence of our digital ephemera, or what I have termed CRAP (communications, recordings, apps, and photos), means we’re making too much to save, and what we do save has a short shelf life.]]

Digital backups, like hard drives, only last three to five years. And even if they did last longer, they’re not enough. “For long-term preservation, you need more than backups. You need monitoring of the data to alert you that a file has changed,” Martinez said. File types and the software that read them are constantly and quietly changing, and we often won’t know we’ve lost access to a file until we try and fail to open it. But for every lost file there are more to take its place, like a pixelbound Hydra; we make new files more often than we lose or delete them.

The sheer volume of what we digitally produce is thousands of times the amount that even a prolific and diligent person might have created and stored in the pre-digital age. The smaller personal computers of the early 2000s may have had a gigabyte of data on them, compared to the terabyte we accumulate on our laptops today. Email inboxes can contain tens of thousands of messages alone, which are laborious and costly for archivists to wade through. And of course, we mustn’t forget about cloud storage or Google Drive. Or their monthly charges, for those of us who are too overwhelmed to sift through our digital hoards to stay within the free storage limit.

Growing up, I was taught that paper usage was killing the environment. Today, the immense water usage of server farms comes up even in casual conversation, as data centers emit enough carbon to rival entire countries. Though the paper industry is not entirely innocent in its global emissions, with our exponentially increasing digital storage needs, the tech industry is far from a wholly greener alternative. 

Aside from the challenges of volume and preservation, the experiential information of a document is another level of information that archivists think about when preserving digital media. For instance, if you only have access to this story as a PDF, there’s no guarantee that you’ll have the metadata that tells you if it was written on a phone or laptop. This could lead a future historian to different conclusions about the writer’s life or work. 

Giving future historians access to accurate and representational information about your life might be irrelevant to you; perhaps you’d rather not have to fuss over digital filing hygiene, or maybe you simply don’t care. There’s a chance some of you might even feel like there’s no point, that there will be no one left in this future I’m asking you to imagine. But even if you have no interest in being part of our collective history, you might want to consider leaving something behind for your kids and grandkids, things that will give them a peek into your life before they were born. Reflecting on “what was” gives us a way of situating ourselves in the present. 

It’s awful to be misunderstood, and there’s no guarantee that the stuff we leave behind—physical or digital—will help us entirely avoid that. But maybe we can try. In her Astra Mag essay about email records, Hannah Gold points out that the combination of physical notebooks and emails donated by the critic Chris Kraus gave her access to a depth and breadth of information about the artist that could not be gleaned through either digital or physical records alone. 

But would actively creating physical CRAP for the purpose of counteracting a digital dark age give future historians a false sense of our time? We might not keep paper journals or start writing letters to our loved ones without the prompt proposed; creating physical stuff isn’t representative of the moment we’re in. Would it be like making history purely for the sake of writing history books? Perhaps, if the argument was to simply physicalize our digital objects. What I propose instead is a practice of creating original physical, non-digital objects as a way of being more mindful and thoughtful about what we create and keep. Most of our digital CRAP is waste: duplications and emails and screenshots and voice notes we’ve saved merely because we can, without even thinking about it—without thinking about the space it takes up, because that space is invisible to us. 

As someone who grew up primarily but not entirely online (cue the unforgettable sound of dial-up), I’m worried we are creating less and less physical CRAP to accompany our digital footprints. So, I’ve decided to make more physical CRAP in my life, and I invite you to join me.

That is, take more notes on paper, print more photos, annotate physical copies of books, and maybe even send a few letters each year. I was even inspired to keep a consistent journal in one of those classic composition notebooks after seeing one in The New School Archives that belonged to a university president’s daughter in 1935. This practice surely won’t rescue us from a digital dark age, nor do I think my life in particular is necessarily something a future historian will find at all noteworthy. But my grandchildren might. 

Maybe it will help me to take better care of what I capture—in the dual sense, both caring about what I choose to memorialize in a note or photo, as well as helping me to care for that object after its creation. Through this exercise, if you choose to join me, we gain awareness of all the thoughtless digital waste we create. But if the experiment fails, and you and I are swept up into the digital abyss, at least I can sleep soundly knowing this story will be safeguarded in The New School Archives, both in print and digital. 
