---
title: New School, Old Troubles
author: Ariana Guerra
editor: Lillian Heckler
images: Ash Reynolds
web: Elijah Ager Luckett
---

## Administrators claim major changes will create a new future for TNS, but the community isn’t so sure.

In fall 2026, the new school will be reborn. At least, that’s what President Joel Towers has claimed in his communications about coming restructuring plans at the university. 

“Spurred by a historically significant, multi-year structural budget deficit and immense pressures on higher education in the US, we are making changes that will be transformative, reclaiming our place at the forefront of higher education innovation,” Towers said in a university-wide communication on March 3, 2026.

Towers is right, the climate around higher education is changing. The Trump administration has vowed to end “woke” ideologies in universities, starting by eliminating Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) initiatives and blocking international student visas. Amid these pressures, colleges nationwide are experiencing lower enrollment numbers.

The New School, with its century-plus history of social justice roots (and poor financial performance), now faces an existential threat. The university has a projected $48 million deficit for the 2025–26 academic year, which the administration has cited as grounds for a massive restructuring plan. The community faces many challenges, but one question remains at the forefront: [[Right: what will happen to the core values of The New School as leadership makes these sweeping changes?]]

On November 25, 2025, staff and faculty received an email outlining the planned austerity measures. These measures included cuts to retirement contributions, voluntary separation packages (paid incentives to leave, rather than wait for a potential layoff), and a list of programs that would be “paused.” More than five months later, students still have not received an official university communication confirming which majors, minors, and certificates are on the chopping block. The only publicly-available lists detailing the twenty-three programs and sixteen minors being cut were published after independent reporting by The New School’s student-run news organization, The New School Free Press. Student journalists have largely shouldered the burden of researching and sharing this vital information that the university withholds and obscures.

“I saw it on Instagram,” a fifth-year anthropology student said, when asked how they learned their program was being indefinitely discontinued and eventually, at some unknown point in the future, redesigned.

Another student in the joint Bachelor’s-Master’s program, whose Creative Publishing and Critical Journalism (CPCJ) MA program will merge with the Creative Writing MFA program, asked, “I start CPCJ next year—what will that merging mean? What am I going to be studying? What will my master’s be in?”

In addition to the “indefinite discontinuation” and potential “eventual redesign” of programs—a majority of which are liberal arts subjects, including history, sociology, and anthropology—the university announced plans to implement a two-college model. This is starkly different from the thirteen schools that made up the university in recent years. Beginning in fall 2026, Eugene Lang College of Liberal Arts and The New School for Social Research (NSSR) will dissolve into one college, and the College of Performing Arts and Parsons School of Design into another. 

In a Gothamist article, former university spokesperson Amy Malsin was quoted saying, “There is no targeting of any division, department, or individuals.” Student reactions to the drastic changes say otherwise.

Asked about the general attitudes of Parsons students around the restructuring, Parsons senior Hannah Song said, “They don’t know about it. They don’t care.” That indifference of some students may be due to the lack of clear information from administrators, or because different schools are impacted disproportionately. Most of the outrage on social media and around campus has come from students in Lang and NSSR.

Because Parsons is well-known and highly profitable, it is a considerable asset to The New School’s public perception. So much so that, in a 2023 leaked restructuring planning document reviewed by Back Matter, an idea was floated to merge the school into a singular unit under the name Parsons University. It could be argued that higher administration members favor their “home” schools; President Towers served as executive dean of Parsons from 2009–2019, while Richard Kessler, TNS provost and executive vice president for academic affairs, served as executive dean of the College of Performing Arts (CoPA) from 2011–2025. Lang and NSSR face the brunt of devastating cuts and changes, Parsons faces the fewest.

CoPA drama senior McKenna Flekman believes there is a Parsons bias. “CoPA, for example, which will now be under Parsons, will not be the priority within the fashion and design school,” she said. She also shared that the general outlook on restructuring from students in the drama program is negative. “Within the school of performing arts, drama students already don’t get as much attention or resources as jazz or Mannes... we have already noticed budget cuts,” she said, like fired production staff and slashed budgets for senior showcase headshots.

Another significant change is that all doctoral program admissions are paused for the 2026–27 academic year—except for the clinical psychology department. A November email co-signed by Kessler and T. Alexander Aleinikoff, executive dean of The New School for Social Research, described the decision as “one critical step in our future planning to address this deficit.” They highlighted that the psychology department would continue in order to maintain accreditation with the American Psychological Association, and to “continue [the school’s] commitment to a high-demand area of research and potential funding.” Beyond accreditation concerns, it’s worth noting that these students are workers too. They provide the majority of mental health support offered through Student Health Services (SHS), a resource that upper administration seeks to cut in half. 

President Towers has been publicly adamant that PhD programs lose the university revenue and that it’s not sustainable to fund them. He has simultaneously denied funding proposals worth $14 million—enough to unpause admissions—from various members of the Board of Trustees. Faculty from the NSSR economics department have additionally debunked the idea that the PhD programs contributed to the deficit, sharing statistics such as, “There were roughly thirty PhD Teaching Fellows generating between $1.4 million and $2 million annually in revenue before cuts.” 

The most distressing transformation is the dismantling of staff and faculty. According to an email from Towers, as a result of the accepted voluntary separation packages, the university workforce has been reduced by seven percent. This number, however, fails to meet the administration’s twenty percent total reduction goal, which was proposed to mirror the 20 percent decrease in student enrollment since 2021.

To get there, mass “involuntary separations”—also known as layoffs, outside of the university communication jargon—are set to be implemented by June 1. Before the Provost’s office announced this date officially on March 13, university employees were haunted by the unstable status of their job security. And even after receiving the doomsday date, administrators have provided almost no clarity on how these decisions will be made, or about which employees are worth the cost.

“We’ve been getting major announcements from leadership with little guidance or specificity on how and when structural changes, including layoffs and separations, will occur. This uncertainty creates mistrust,” said one Lang staff member.

When this official information is shared, it’s through long, complex, and often confusing emails, full of broad statements about “meeting this moment,” and creating “a version of The New School that is more open, more adaptable, and more supportive of students who come here for a truly distinctive education.” 

Molly Kaufman, a part-time faculty (PTF) member who is housed under the Lang Office of Civic Engagement and Social Justice, shared that she has relied on part-time faculty union ACT-UAW Local 7902 to make sense of the administration’s communications. “The PTF union has been making sure we are in the loop. My union has treated me like a valuable member of the community worthy of respect in this situation.”

Even when given extra support,students and faculty are left with substantial unanswered questions about how decisions are being made behind the scenes. The New School has an annual operating budget of $450 million and 86 percent of that comes from tuition. Where are tuition dollars going, and how did the school get into this large of a deficit in the first place? 

According to The New School Financial Transparency Council—made up of administrators, and the student, faculty, and staff senates—forty-seven percent of the budget is spent on faculty, staff, and student salaries. Twenty-three percent is spent on space-related costs, fifteen percent on employee benefits, six percent on office and business expenses, and seven percent on “professional fees” (meaning consulting fees, commencement, and guest speakers). The remaining 2 percent is spent on advertising, travel, and meals (not specified for whom).

Lumping all employee salaries into one category paints an incomplete picture. According to a 990 nonprofit filing by the school, administrative higher ups, like the previous provost Renée White, made upwards of $618,605 in 2024. The report also named a few of the top-earning full-time faculty, who made around $300,000 and $400,000. In the same year, part-time faculty members being paid minimum union rates and teaching a seminar-style class with sixty contact hours across all colleges made $9,360. When the highest-paid employees take up so much of the operating budget, is reducing the number of the lowest-paid staff and faculty actually going to sustainably reduce university expenditures?

In a Jacobin article, historian and New School professor Hannah Leffingwell wrote, “[President Towers] and the provost rejected the American Association of University Professors’ recent proposal to cap all salaries at $200,000 across the university.” This proposal is a key economic solution that community groups like the University Student Senate are advocating for.

“Short on money, high on power, we don’t trust Joel Towers,” students and faculty chanted at a rally held on December 10, 2025, as reported by Hyperallergic. Many in the community believe the deficit is due to years of mismanagement, particularly regarding poor real estate investments and administrative salary bloat. These critiques can be seen on various New School-related social media accounts. On the student-run @austeritysingers Instagram page, which posts songs in protest of the restructuring, a user commented, “[Restructuring is] an absolute betrayal of the legacy of The New School... Shame on The New School board who seems more interested in the prime Manhattan real estate than protecting this unique academic jewel.”

The New School Free Press found public records that showed the school bought President Towers an apartment for $5,240,000 in 2025. While it’s normal for university presidents to have provided housing, the administration made this purchase after selling the previous presidential housing for $10.3 million in the same year. This gesture was widely presented as a financially responsible act, and community members were under the impression that The New School no longer had presidential housing after the sale. In reality, the townhouse sold for half the asking price, contributed $10 million to the deficit, and Towers ultimately received a penthouse anyway. 

The New School has also historically struggled with its small, and at times, no endowment. The school’s current $500 million fund pales in comparison to other private liberal arts colleges, like Bard College’s $1 billion endowment and Amherst College’s $3.9 billion. In her Public Seminar piece, “Reckoning with The New School’s Legacies,” history professor Julia Foulkes explains, “Because it had no endowment, The New School’s budget depended on how many students enrolled from semester to semester. But this economic design made the school vulnerable. A financial crisis and a new president in the early 1960s prompted greater attention to budgets and numbers.”

Enrollment continues to be a problem. The New School Financial Transparency Council states “even modest changes in enrollment have a significant impact,” given the school’s reliance on tuition money. “Enrollment has fallen by about 10 percent from historic levels,” they state on their website, which the university cites as the explanation for three years of significant operating deficits.

“I worry that these proposed changes, many of which are claimed to be in reaction to low enrollment, will only make enrollment worse,” said Madeline Trice, a Creative Writing MFA student. Some of these changes include last-minute class cancellations like NSSR part-time professor Melissa Monroe’s Faith in Modern Literature writing class this spring, and Lang part-time professor Victoria Abrash’s Dramatic Masters theater class.

Not only are course, program, and employment cuts at stake, but so is the integrity of the university’s legacy. 

The New School was famously started as an act of resistance in 1919 by progressive intellectuals who resigned from Columbia University after being censored for their public antiwar speech. Founders Charles Beard, John Dewey, James Harvey Robinson, and Thorstein Veblen wanted to build a new university model that emphasized free speech, intellectualism, and a progressive spirit. They aimed to “Secure a sufficient endowment on the understanding that the greater part of the income shall be spent on research and education and the least possible amount on administration,” as stated in the founding document for The New School (then The New School for Social Research). 

There is a case to be made that the restructuring and austerity measures are being used as justification to stray from the once radical practices of the school. This is particularly seen with the development of the Center for the American Experience (CAE), which describes itself as a “university-wide initiative [that] will explore the past, present, and future of the US through an interdisciplinary lens.” 

A leaked founding document for the Center stated that, “at its core, the Center will uphold the principle of institutional neutrality, fostering an environment where pluralism, dialogue, and fearless debate can thrive.” The merits of this “neutrality” might be called into question when one considers that a dominant figure of this initiative has publicly written in opposition of the pro-Palestine student movements on campus. Several members of the New School community faced repercussions from the university (i.e., student and faculty suspensions) after voicing support for Palestine, while the vocal faculty in opposition received administrative resources and support for this initiative. This dissonance sends a particular message about which politics are protected on campus, and does not seem to allow for the “fearless debate” this initiative claims to foster.

“It is one thing for conservative universities to tamp down on free speech. It is quite another for one of the country’s most outspoken bastions of leftist thought to crumble under the weight of neoliberal cowardice,” Leffingwell wrote. 

The New School has never been a neutral campus. Its students organized during the Occupy Wall Street movement, chased former New School president Bob Kerrey in protest of the Iraq War, rallied together to fight for campus cafeteria workers’ rights, and spent hours on picket-lines during the 2022 part-time faculty strike. In their collective actions, students make it clear that they do not come to this school to be silenced or to be apolitical; they come to learn about the world and how to change it into a more just place. 

Why then, at a time of resurgent authoritarianism and accelerating climate catastrophe, would the university leadership target programs like history, sociology, and environmental studies? Even if the numbers support the decision, the optics are abysmal. As the New School mission statement says, “we are committed to developing students who will have an impact on the world and address the most pressing social issues of our time.” Where will that commitment stand after June 1, when the administration’s twenty percent reduction goal is supposed to be met? 

The New School’s future is unknown. Students, staff, and faculty are scared—scared for the quality of their education, community, job security, and the university’s legacy. [[Right: “In time, there may not even be a New School—just a real estate company that used to pretend it cared about being a university,” Trice said.]]
