---
title: How to Play with Paper and Pixels
author: Eva_Szilardi-Tierney
---

After I saw the 2009 stop-motion film Coraline, I told my mom that I wanted to start drawing. The movie’s strange, intricate, and handformed world filled me with a desire to do that. Maybe this was to be expected for a child reared on the wonders of 1990s handmade media: the claymation classic Wallace and Gromit was a household staple that fascinated as much as frightened me, and I spent hours poring over the exquisite set design and photography of the I Spy books. I have a particularly vivid memory of an elementary school visit from the author Elisa Kleven, who had written and illustrated a mixed-media collage storybook. A student asked Kleven where she found all the different materials she used in her illustrations, and I got excited when she mentioned unexpected sources like her daughter's old jeans. Those could be my jeans, I thought. I had never been much of an artist, but there was something about the tactility of these projects that made me believe I could do it, too. 

It’s a sentiment I’ve now heard echoed by some of the artists working in a newer blend of the digital and physical: handmade video games. Unlike traditional video games, in which backgrounds and characters are exclusively created using digital software, the assets in handmade games are crafted from clay, paper, fabric, and more. Game designers then convert their handiwork to a digitally programmable form, either through flat scans or by taking multiple pictures of their creation from different angles via a process called photogrammetry. 

Handmade games began appearing iIn the early 1990s,. While when innovations in 3D digital animation threatened stop motion’s broader popularity, a few studios looking for an edge saw clay as a potentially fresh approach to gaming. It was the Stop motion could be the route to a childishly charming Mortal Kombat parody (1993’s Clayfighter), andor the unique angle needed to launch a film studio’s new game publishing imprint— (DreamWorks Interactive’s point-and-click adventure, The Neverhood). Released in 1996, it yielded high hopes and These high hopes yielded some truly innovative results as—1996’s The Neverhood is an immersive journey through an unsettling, fully realized clay world that features delightful and technically amazing stop motion sequences. But despite their creative risks, these games never achieved more than middling success, and by 2001 the clay wave had crashed.

Part of the problem for handmade games at this time was convincing publishers to back ideas that were expensive, time-consuming, and odd. But in the early aughts, broadband internet, digital distribution networks, and accessible design software suddenly made game development and publishing accessible, presenting new opportunities for the commercially risky and labor-intensive fields of handmade game design. Someone with time and commitment could now self-publish their handcrafted game, and while success was far from guaranteed, there was always that slim chance of a viral hit.

Like their predecessors in stop motion film, handmade video games straddle the line between the virtual and the real. The Handmade game styles vary wildly, each aiming to accomplish a different goal either—directing the player to take notice of their own physical world; signaling that the game requires a particular mental approach; or total, uncanny immersion in a film-like experience—through their interactivity. But what they all have in common is a sense of experimentation: each plays with how such a distinct visual style affects the experience of playing the game.

This was the case for 2003’s Samorost. Designed in Adobe Flash for a college thesis project, Samorost uses a combination of digital painting and photo collage to tell the surreal story of a gnome averting disaster on a gnarled, wood-stump planet. After the game found an unexpectedly massive audience, its developer, Czech studio Amanita Design, made a second, then a third installment, each increasing in complexity. 

The Samorost games are bizarre; its little planets are a mixture of the natural and industrial, with hairy antlers sitting next to hissing chrome pipes, woven together with sound design that deals in grunts and coos rather than words. Without dialogue, text, or tutorial, the player is on their own in figuring out how to move through these strange worlds., and tThe games’ mix of from-life textures and simple digital sprites (the player-controlled gnome is flat and cartoon-y) encourages this sense of disorientation by hiding interactable objects in its highly detailed environments. The player must either run their cursor over every pockmarked bit of bark and rusty metal, or try to intuit the games’ whimsical logic, which takes some getting used to (for instance, you might direct the little gnome to play a magical flute to a crumpled plastic bottle, which summons a burbling bottle-shaped spirit who splits itself in two with a scimitar, indicating that you’re free to slice off the top of the bottle to make a mini spaceship). Sometimes the answer is simply to wait for the otherworldly environment to deliver you to the next step. While there’s no real sense of danger, there is the delightfully unsettling feeling of traversing an unknown and alien landscape.

In this sense, Samorost demands to be played on its own terms. Following in the footsteps of Czech and Soviet surrealist filmmakers, Samorost’s its jumbled, sometimes disquieting style disarms the player to better induct them into the tinkering mindset needed to hash out its puzzles. The point is for the player to not only enjoy its unique style, but to understand that look as part of the game’s specific approach to gameplay. To fully enjoy Samorost is to see the forest and the trees. 

This is quite a different approach than a game like 2024’s Harold Halibut, wherein the gameplay is more of a vehicle for the style itself. Set 250 years in the future on a giant spaceship stuck on a water-logged planet, Harold Halibut features the sad-eyed Harold, a hapless lab assistant bemused by the ship’s corporate bureaucracy. The player controls Harold as he plods around, solving mysteries of various sizes and shooting the breeze with the colorful characters on board.  

Calling itself “a cross between game and stop motion film,” the game was widely praised for its richly detailed sets and characters; unlike Samorost, Harold Halibut is entirely three-dimensional, with every set, prop, and puppet molded by hand. This meticulousness makes the world of Harold Halibut feel real, like a planet that came into being of its own accord and which will continue to hum along even when the game isn’t running. The tactility of every item—the feel of the upholstery on a seat, watching Harold take longer strides to make it up and down stairs, the flyers, so small as to be barely legible, tacked up on a bulletin board—is preserved, but the scenes feel seamless, perfect. You’re left with the same sense of awe that I had when I watched Coraline, but with the privilege of controlling how long you stay in each environment, allowing you to luxuriate in the details.

This is also the main feature of the gameplay. Most of the game involves simply piloting Harold from room to room, occasionally solving a simple puzzle to trigger an event and move the story along. Older players might be reminded of full-motion video (FMV) games, those relics from the 1990s that used pre-recorded video files for higher resolution animations or cutscenes. FMV games that were more cutscene than game were sometimes referred to as interactive movies, territory that Harold sometimes veers into. 

Luckily, Harold Halibut is not only much more beautiful than its 90s counterparts, iIts less involved gameplay is actually in service of the game’s story. 

Harold is a depressed guy trapped in the same metal tube he’s lived in his entire life. The player being forced to slow down is more than an opportunity to enjoy the years of work put into developing the game’s aesthetic; it mimics the pace of Harold’s monotonous life trapped in the same metal tube he’s lived in his entire life. The level of detail likewise mirrors Harold’s sense of claustrophobia—one can imagine Harold memorizing the woodgrain of the floorboards in his bedroom, or the pattern of the linoleum tiles in the kitchen, or the dents in the ship’s metal walls. When he finally does leaves the ship, the detail is still there, but it’s more spaced out. The camera is much more active, twisting around to reveal the scope and expansiveness of this new alien cave, coming in closely only during cutscenes when Harold, too, has stopped and has a chance to take it all in.

But what if a game’s tactility was as important to the story as Harold Halibut, just in a completely different way? This is the case for Abigail, an in-development PC game which is determined to make the player aware of its handmade-ness. Birthed from an NYU MFA thesis project, Abigail tells the story of a 20-something who unexpectedly returns to her (felt, clay, and collage) hometown. Discovering that her time away has left her relationships back home in disrepair, Abigail sets out to make amends and reconnect with herself.

The tactility of Abigail’s in-game world serves a few general purposes. For one, the different materials play an important role in setting the tone of each of Kiln Bay’s neighborhoods: felt in Abigail’s comfortable stomping ground, clay in the crumbling old town center, and collage in the punky art district. The style is unpolished and child-like, intentionally so: bare cardboard peeks out from the backs of buildings, thumb prints show in lumpy clay fountains, and the stop motion sequences stutter charmingly. For Abigail’s creators, it was important that their elbow grease be as visible to the player as possible. “We want to scream in a person's face, ‘We made this with our hands and we want you to see that we made it with our hands,’” co-developer Antonio Andrade explained.

This intentional roughness also reflects Abigail’s growing sense of her own agency. Abigail is forced to come home from a big-city life that’s left her feeling lost and purposeless, and what she returns to is a town full of personality and intention, both in-game and metatextually. Kiln Bay’s imperfections are a reminder of the fact that humans loved this town enough to spend hours twisting pipe cleaners, cutting cardboard, and glueing fabric in order to bring it to life. The town itself is a work in progress, and the game feels most evocative when it celebrates that fact: I was utterly delighted when a pizza shop literally opened up, three of its walls folding backwards the way a rock gets lifted off of a surprised bug. Abigail might feel out of control, but she inhabits a world in which every detail was crafted with purpose, and that much is obvious to the player.

This points to an ideal that all handmade games seem to aspire to: a distinct sense of humanity, especially when compared with traditional games. “I think video games as a medium are bad at communicating that people touch them,” Abigail co-developer Biagi Calicchia mused. “When people see a 3D model, they don't think that a human being made that,” whereas even the most polished of handmade games gain something from having been literally handled, even if its game developers aren’t able to describe exactly what the difference is. Harold Halibut’s director, Onat Hekimoglu, described the years of labor that went into the game and how it changes how the game is played. “It pays off to just noodle about and look at everything just because eeeevery last 1 cm coffee cup was carefully made and then passed through between 5-7 other people’s hands or eyes to then arrive in front of whoever is playing. And I truly believe that’s apparent somehow.”

None of these titles have revolutionary new gameplay mechanics, but what they offer instead is a more subtle appreciation for how story and style interact within video games. Giving players a visual point of reference from their own lives, even (maybe even especially) in strange and unexpected ways primes them for a new experience, making the game more emotionally resonant in turn. And the traces of a human’s touch are important to these games because we are drawn to human stories—even as artificial intelligence looms over creative industries, threatening to replace smaller projects like these with indistinguishable pablum.

Handmade games are still a very niche subgenre within the definitionally marginal world of indie gaming. Far more people are purchasing the latest NBA 2K or Black Ops than will ever see Samorost, and this will most likely never change. Still, there’s an enduring charm to these games that comes from their novel mix of the digital and the real, the fantastic and the limited. It’s the kind of fascinating contradiction that you return to in your mind over and over again, that you can’t shake until you find it, gratefully, perhaps years later, in another piece of art.
