---
title: Playing Hardball
author: Amelia Nonemacher
editor: Cara Szigethy
images: Katya Wack & Elijah Ager Luckett
web: Elijah
---

## Following years of substandard treatment, Minor League athletes strive to unionize

Connor tobin sees instability as the defining feature of lower division soccer in the United States. He spent the decade from 2011 to 2021 drifting between the now-defunct National American Soccer League (NASL) and the United Soccer League (USL), playing under different managers, different ownership, and different cities. “The one constant has been that the player experience has been . . . suboptimal, being as nice as I possibly can on that,” he said.

Suboptimal is an understatement. Tobin told Back Matter that he once played with an international teammate who went to the team doctor for knee pain, only to be sent away with a prescription for rest and ibuprofen. Despite no improvement in his pain, the team delayed an MRI for four months due to the high cost of the procedure; when the teammate at last received the MRI, the results found that he had been playing on a torn ACL and MCL. He’d also heard stories of clubs failing to file workers’ compensation for surgeries. In one case, when the bill was transferred to debt collectors, the player who had received the necessary operation found themself being hassled for tens of thousands of dollars, tanking their credit score. On top of it all, facilities were miles below professional standards: locker rooms in trailers with no running water, players left to tape their own ankles without physical therapy and medical care, teams voiding players’ contracts with few adjudication rights. The average contract was under $20,000 yearly without a housing obligation, and 75 to 80 percent of players were signed to one-year contracts. More than ten players were signed to zero-dollar contracts.

“How many people would be comfortable living with that amount of uncertainty in your life?” Tobin asked. “Every single year, you don’t know where you’re going to be. Every single offseason, you’re like, ey, where’s my next paycheck?”

To some extent, being a professional athlete requires tolerance for instability and discomfort: staking your financial future on the fragile human body, giving up your autonomy to an outside party that may not have your best interests in mind, sacrificing your financial security, mobility, and independence in your middle-to-old age for a couple more years of playing. These disadvantages may be worth it for a player in the NFL or NBA compensated with a multimillion-dollar salary and a chance at a championship ring, but in minor and development league sports in the United States, many players are just trying to survive amid poor working conditions and rampant labor exploitation.

“We create the core product, we’re the frontline worker, so to not have our perspective or our wants, needs, and concerns formally being raised and having a legal mechanism by which to do so, the business is going to evolve, and it’s going to leave the frontline worker behind,” Tobin said. “If the frontline worker who’s primarily creating the product isn’t considered in all this, how good is your product going to be?”

In the last few years however, conditions have changed across minor and development league sports. Tobin and his fellow USL players founded the USL Players’ Association in 2018 and signed their first collective bargaining agreement (CBA) in 2021, ending the days of zero-dollar contracts and unpaid medical bills. Minor League Baseball (MiLB) players unionized in 2022 and signed their first CBA in 2023, and the NBA’s G League unionized in 2020. Most recently, players in the ECHL, a feeder league of the NHL, went on strike for forty-one games in December 2025 to secure a new CBA. As union power grows across the US, players in minor league sports have come together to demand better pay, better benefits, and better treatment in their workplaces. A specter is haunting minor league sports—the specter of labor.


There’s a prevalent misconception that minor league life is full of young kids chasing the American Dream, happy to sleep on a couch and push their bodies to the limit for a chance to someday make it in the big leagues. In 2022, Major League Baseball (MLB) Commissioner Rob Manfred wrote that minor league players “chose to devote several years after high school or college to pursue their dream of becoming professional baseball players before starting their non-baseball careers, not at all dissimilar to the millions of young adults who devote several years to break into acting, music, or politics before moving on to other occupations.”

“It’s a really funny quote from Rob because, like, what does Rob Manfred know about acting or music? He doesn’t seem that interested in either of those things,” said Bobby Wagner, co-host of the Tipping Pitches podcast. “It’s very convenient for them to talk about minor leaguers that way, as if they don’t provide an essential service. The function of the minor leagues, to a major league team, is to be a training ground for the players who are going to provide a future upside in value at the major league level. Even if 80 percent of minor league players never even sniff the big leagues, just the fact that they’re there at all to develop the other 20 percent of players is an incredibly valuable economic function to major league teams.”

Wagner and co-host Alex Bazely, along with fans and organizations like Advocates for Minor Leaguers, had been talking about unionization as a potential solution to the exploitation in the minors but were shocked when it actually happened. “We made merch that said ‘unionize the minors,’ and then we really never thought that that was gonna go anywhere,” Wagner said. “We always thought this was going to be a ten-year project, not a two-year project.”

Unionizing sports leagues poses a unique organizing challenge as players are geographically isolated from each other and are literally competing against each other for roster spots. Unlike in the USL (which does not have Division I affiliates in Major League Soccer and functions as its own self-contained league) or the NBA’s G League (which serves as a development pool for the NBA but rarely produces superstars) nearly every MLB player will spend some amount of time in the minors. If you get that major league call-up, the material conditions of the job can change drastically within twenty-four hours
as you’re moved to a different labor pool with radically improved pay, workplace protections, and facilities. 

So what does this constant turnover mean for improving conditions in the minors? “I’ll tell you one thing, it makes it hard to organize,” said Michael Baumann, who covers baseball for FanGraphs. “In minor league baseball, half the team changes every few weeks, with guys getting promoted or traded or demoted or released. And so it’s hard to build those relationships and trust, to really get a nexus of what you might ordinarily form an organizing committee out of.”

Despite these challenges, MiLB players found the abject conditions of their workplace incentive enough to come together as workers. The amateurized image of the minors advanced by Manfred and other management tidily shifts responsibility onto players who make, in some cases, less than $12,000 per year while raising a family or sending money back home, while also cramming into a two bedroom apartment with five other teammates or living in a host family’s guest bedroom, forgoing pay for spring training and the playoffs, and living below the poverty line in order to pursue their dream of playing baseball. However bad conditions are for domestic players, they’re doubly worse for international players like those from Latin America and the Caribbean, who often come to the US through dubious recruiting tactics that have been investigated as human trafficking by the Department of Justice. [[Right: The average minor league player is not a kid playing ball to put off finding a nine-to-five, but a worker entitled to basic rights in their workplace.]]

Post-unionization, the floor of minor league baseball has risen dramatically. Seven months after the MLB recognized the union, players ratified their first CBA and saw their minimum salaries more than double at every level of minor league ball. They were guaranteed private bedrooms in league housing at the Double-A and Triple-A levels (players at lower levels could be asked to share a room, but had the option to opt out and receive a stipend), medical care for work-related injuries for eighteen months (up from six), and control over their own name, image, and likeness rights that had previously been held by the league.

“You don’t have to make that decision of, can I pursue my dream to play major league baseball, or can I buy diapers for my kid? That’s not really a consideration anymore the way it was ten years ago,” Baumann said. “If one potential future All Star makes that decision and chooses baseball over going and getting a real job, the fans benefit because the quality of the sport is better.”


As a particular Canadian enterprise brought new eyes to hockey over the winter, players in the ECHL were gearing up to go on strike. Two levels below the NHL’s limelight, the ECHL has evolved into more of a true feeder league over the last few years, akin to the MiLB’s various levels of play. Jordan Binnington, who played 303 minutes as Team Canada’s primary goaltender in the Milan–Cortina Olympics, developed in the ECHL; nearly 800 players from the ECHL have made it to the NHL over the years. Although the ECHL has been unionized under the Professional Hockey Players’ Association since 1967 and has enjoyed benefits such as housing and healthcare that other minor leaguers won much later, its players are far from empowered.

As in the rest of the minor leagues, pay is a constant issue—players on ECHL contracts could earn as little as $14,000 per year pre-tax—but in December, players were most concerned about rest, or the lack thereof. Games could be scheduled as often as three in three nights or four in five nights, a brutal workload not expected of AHL or NHL players. Road trips required players to travel as long as thirty hours in a single weekend on two-seater buses, and some teams did not allow players days off. The ECHL’s bargaining unit conceded that the league could not afford to pay players much more, but saw an opportunity to improve their workplace regardless.

The ensuing work stoppage saw forty-one games cancelled across the league, sparking backlash from fans. As ticket and concession prices have risen dramatically over the years, minor league games are the only way for many communities to interact with sports, and many minor league teams have shut down or moved out of their original cities in recent years. The Athletic found that the yearly cost of being a “casual hockey fan” (one who watches games via streaming and goes to one game a year) ranged from $123 to $460.42 in the US and from $257.30 to $443.57 in Canada for the 2024–2025 season. Why, season ticket holders wondered, were they expected to bear the brunt of disruptions when the sport was already cutting them out?

Wagner referenced something Baumann had told him in their conversations about the minor leagues: “The best way to talk about this with fans is to demonstrate to people that what the owners are doing to the players—especially the minor leaguers—is what your boss is doing to you, just on a different scale.” Plenty of Americans can relate to precarious employment, housing insecurity, and workplace exploitation. When they’re able to take their family to see a minor league sports game, they have much more in common with players than they do with management, who are the reason tickets and concessions have become more expensive and access to minor league sports has decreased. As players win better treatment, the game improves for fans and players.

“How many people leave the sport every year, not because they’re not good enough, but because it’s not viable?” Tobin asked. “What are we doing to our level of play—not just for this league, but what’s the impact on US soccer and our national team? We want to be more competitive. You raise the floor, you keep better players in this for longer.”

As the US Men’s National Soccer Team prepares to make a World Cup run this summer, most of their key players will commute from Europe to play in their home country. They’re not likely to last very long in the tournament; their fans have been priced out of stadiums. Could the US field a better team if their players didn’t have to develop on a different continent? Could Canada’s goalie crisis in the lead-up to the Olympics have been alleviated if more talent could survive in the ECHL? Could life be better if everyone could have an affordable hot dog and one to nine beers at the local minor league ballpark on a beautiful day? The case is clear: as players demand better conditions for themselves, a better sporting world emerges for everyone.
