---
title: The Riot in a Writer’s Soul
author: Cristina Cala
editor: Mandy Kim
images: Ash Reynolds
web: Elijah Ager Luckett
---

When I arrived in New York in the spring of 2009 with a BA in journalism hot off the press, I had stars in my eyes. I hit the streets and interviewed my heart out. I passed on a job in book publishing with a barely livable salary despite the lingering recession. Instead, I took a job at a tech startup until I could find something in my field.

I had stars in my eyes when I landed my first media job at a magazine publisher in the big city. Two years before, I’d been laid off from my job as a copy editor working the graveyard shift at the daily print newspaper in my hometown in Ohio. I saw the end of my first gig in print journalism as a dare, a challenge, a sign that I was meant for something bigger. Arriving at Condé Nast, I quickly excelled. I was promoted year after year, negotiating my salary like a real adult, as every woman must do. Then came the awards. I was the only writer on a team producing award-winning campaigns in digital advertising. Digital was the future.

By the time I secured a management position, things started to change. The media industry was troubled. Maybe digital couldn’t save it, after all. In the 2010s, industry folks lived in incessant fear that the hammer would drop in the next round of increasingly frequent layoffs.

I kept making the cut, and still I had stars in my eyes. As a writer, I was, unbelievably, financially independent in an increasingly expensive city. And sure, my work was rarely bylined, paid for by advertisers as a business model, but I was part of a company doing the important work of journalism. So what if I was writing banner ads? Editorial salaries were unlivable. And what about the internship program that was shut down for paying nothing at all? I removed my rose-colored glasses and wiped the smudges on my designer sleeve. This was the publisher of the world’s premier fashion magazine, after all, and I did ride the elevator with Ms. Wintour once, but to be fair I was already on the elevator when she stepped on. I didn’t step off.

I changed jobs, swapping one legacy publisher for another. This company happened to publish one of the most influential news magazines in history. 

It was an election year and a woman was running for president—we all thought she would be the first. Surely, things would get better. At my new job, I pitched big ideas for campaigns that centered women who were boundary pushers making change, including a campaign to celebrate women who were first in their fields. A male executive asked whether we really “needed” that. Two years after Hillary lost, that iconic news magazine was sold off to a private buyer, a literal billionaire. 

The Hybrids, Multi-hyphenates, and Independent Writers

My writing career has been drafted and redrafted many times.  Looking back, the recession was a primer for the many changes my career would go through and all you can do with a journalism degree, even when it’s not journalism. I’ve worked in editorial production roles across multiple industries: as a copy editor in daily news (shoutout to my hometown paper, the Youngstown Vindicator), as a writer in business and tech—ranging from branded content for WIRED to profiling women in the C-Suite—and as a copywriter, editor, and content director in media and advertising during my journalism-adjacent Condé years. I even had a stint as a certified career coach and résumé writer (a twenty-five-year-old giving advice to executives, what a world). 

By the time I entered the job market as a millennial, it was defined by instability. I finally got the chop at TIME Inc. in an acquisition in 2017. I never really got over it. I couldn’t shake the ironic, irking feeling that part of the reason I was let go was because of those boundary-pushing ideas I’d pitched to focus the lens on women. I’d been an eldest daughter, a feisty kid (“disruptive in class,” you know the type), and a boundary pusher my whole life—a fighter who is not easily silenced. These are some of the qualities that make us truth seekers and journalists … until truth-telling and business don’t mix. I was writing, editing, and producing stories as a journalist like I’d been trained, but they were diluted and skinned over with a sponsor logo. I was laid off in a merger by the acquisition corporation that would later sell off Time Magazine to the billionaire bidder. My director role was “eliminated,” quietly reposted at the manager level, and backfilled by someone with less experience who would accept the same responsibilities for less pay. That “unnecessary” idea I’d pitched was executed by someone else. The media industry, and by proxy journalism, my early love, took a hit that day. That uneasy feeling I’d had working in lucrative industries in order to be my version of a working writer was my journalistic roots tapping at my shoulder. I stepped off the elevator of legacy media and wiped the stars from my eyes.

But after nearly a decade, I had real skin in the game. By necessity, I became an entrepreneur, consulting for clients and hosting community events for other writers. To make up for the business expenses, I did copywriting and freelance journalism on the side. When I first started Why Women, a writers community and later content agency, I hesitated to claim the title of entrepreneur. With an all-women production team assembled to produce a short film at the historic Women’s March on Washington in January 2017, I felt more like an activist using my editorial background for something urgent. The need to pursue something bigger returned. My millennial resilience felt wilted as my belief in journalism, as a public service, dimmed. I had snuck into media through a side door because of the journalist’s conviction for the truth, but media had an image problem. Trust in the press was beginning to crack in large part due to social media and media illiteracy. I consulted for an agency working to combat misinformation and rebuild a major tech giant’s trust with journalists (and public trust in the platform), believing that if publishers could use it for truth, it could counteract the damage social media had done to democracy in the 2016 election. 

Still, the way the corporate machine had spit me out gnawed at me. I felt disposable, and often like an imposter abandoning my true calling as a writer’s writer. And so I continued dabbling in creative writing of all kinds. That was where the real writing had always lain. In my teens, I was a poet and a songwriter. In my twenties, I was a playwright—workshopping a musical in a development program with Broadway producers as mentors, and writing a stage play in NYU’s summer graduate program. In my thirties, I started my business and then paused to have a child. Isolated as a first-time mom with my community of writers dispersed by the COVID-19 pandemic, I picked up screenwriting again for the first time since my undergrad studies. The script I wrote prompted the novel I’m writing now: a fiction-autofiction hybrid that stems from my journalistic roots as an observer. Last fall, I started my MFA in Creative Writing for fiction at The New School. I turned forty this spring, and now before me is a delicious new decade of creative juice yet to be squeezed. I didn’t know it at the time, but my multi-genre writing experience across journalism, copywriting, and playwriting was forming the resilience required for my writer rebirth through every season.

In a volatile media industry, new hybrids emerge by necessity and creativity alike. For years, I’ve seen friends and colleagues, discarded by the corporate world, go out on their own as independent contractors or business owners, and, sometimes, boomerang back to institutional nine-to-fives—adding skill sets and hyphens to their job titles along the way. The ones who are consistently working have full-time roles at brands or long-term contracts in tech. (The latter are the ones making good money.)

Others are journalists turned branded-content writers: the multi-hyphenate copywriter-editor-producer-social media manager; out-of-work screenwriters who turned to comedy during the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike against Hollywood studios over issues of pay and AI; consultants writing and self-producing their passion projects on the side; tech giggers who write poetry to hold onto a piece of their soul; novelists and memoirists who teach in between book deals; content creators who juggle Substacks, newsletters, TikToks and Instagrams; grad students who study while working day jobs, edit student publications, wait tables, or raise kids.

And the readers who became disillusioned with the fading promise of journalism as a public service? They are the subscribers to the Substacks and newsletters penned by these multi-hyphenates. One bright spot in the disillusionment with legacy media is the growth of independent journalism. Last fall, former Washington Post op-ed writer Karen Attiah—someone paid to write her opinion—was fired, not for something she wrote in her column, but for a series of public Bluesky posts after gun violence became the very thing that killed gun-rights advocate Charlie Kirk. In her role as Global Opinions Editor, she was the last full-time Black opinion columnist on the Washington Post’s staff. Now she’s authoring a Substack, which has grown to 52,000 subscribers since she posted about her termination in September 2025.

Attiah is perhaps one of the most telling examples of the changing landscape of journalism. “As a columnist, I used my voice to defend freedom and democracy, challenge power and reflect on culture and politics with honesty and conviction,” she wrote in her viral Substack post. “Now, I am the one being silenced—for doing my job.”

One of the last articles I published before pivoting to fiction was coverage of the attack on DEI from inside the corporate sector, pressured by the likelihood of a second Trump term—a warning knell of what was to come. After he won the election, my article was taken down. 

As we slide into fascism, writing remains a reflection of the world around us, and the writer’s job will be to rise above the hand held over our mouths to find a way to tell the story—using any format and by any means possible.

The Riot in Our Souls

It’s never been easy making a living as a writer. But doing the work? For writers at heart, there’s no other option. We do it because we must—because we’re storytellers and truth seekers. We  do it to help quell the riot in our souls, as Beatnik writer Seymour Krim wrote in his 1973 essay, “For My Brothers and Sisters in the Failure Business.” It’s a searingly honest confessional on the space between failure and ambition and Krim’s own shortcomings as a writer of 1950s–1960s literary New York. We writers live in that liminal space as we search for what Krim calls our “professional skin.” Krim was a lesser-known contemporary of Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, and a product of New Journalism, the format that lifted the curtain of neutrality in reporting. As an outsider on the fringe of his peers’ success and the literary establishment, Krim was a marginal, in-between figure who considered himself a hybrid. In his way, he was something of a “minor character,” the title of Joyce Johnson’s memoir about her relationship to Kerouac, though the seminal memoir is really the story of the Beat Generation’s women writers moving in the shadow of their male contemporaries.
There is something out-of-body about being young, writerly and on the fringe in New York, starstruck by how tangible success is, in proximity to the stage but waiting in the wings. I grew up in the theater and the ballet, dreaming of Broadway. In my twenties, working in New York became the stage in living color.
Over the last seventeen years, I’ve been on sets with thought leaders and celebrities—and  interviewed a few myself. I’ve hired and trained junior writers and made young women promise they would always negotiate their rate, then watched them surpass my own accomplishments. I’ve sat down with the authors I aspired to be, then watched my colleagues and peers get book deals while I struggled to support my independent programming promoting their books. It’s a challenge to fend off comparisons, but then I remember: I was once them, and they were once me—young writers hoping to step into someone else’s shoes, grateful for the opportunity. It’s all been a privilege. And it’s a privilege to start over again at forty.
I took my share of setbacks. The layoff that changed my trajectory, the risks of running a business, the irreversible wage gap of motherhood, failing upward at all of it, but never losing the need to find the story, to feed the riot within. The first decade of my career was an upward climb in rooms where I could only dream of belonging. In the second half of it, I’ve had to humble myself, peel out of the mold of my former self and believe it’s not too late to be reborn and write again. We might never close the gap between where we are and what we want for our careers, as Krim wrote of the delta between ambition and failure. But to fail is to possess that interminable thirst for the story, that riot of the soul. Still, I must write. And so must you. You, like the journalists inventing hybrids, the poets writing ad copy, and my newest friends and colleagues, the fiction writers seeking truths in imagined worlds. To be a writer, to live a writer’s life, even if you never publish a word (though I hope you do), is to be reborn again with each season of a career. The industry will continue changing and the layoffs will keep coming. But us? We’ll keep writing. 
