---
title: Star-Spangled Banner Ads
author: Christina Cala
---

When I arrived in New York fresh off graduating during the recession that defined a generation of American millennials, I had stars in my eyes. I passed on a job in book publishing because the salary was barely livable.

I had stars in my eyes when I landed my first media job at a premier magazine publisher in the big city, even though I’d already been laid off from my previous job, as a copy editor working the graveyard shift at the daily print newspaper in my hometown. I quickly excelled. I was the only writer on a team producing award-winning campaigns in digital advertising. Digital was the future.

By the time I secured a management position, things started to change. The media industry was troubled, and maybe digital couldn’t save it, after all. In the 2010s anyone in the industry could tell you of the incessant fear that the hammer would drop on them in the next round of increasingly frequent layoffs.

I kept making the cut, and still I had stars in my eyes. As a writer, I was, unbelievably, financially independent in an increasingly expensive city that I could still afford to live in. How many student journalists from Ohio got to be part of legacy magazine journalism? And sure, my work was rarely bylined, paid for by advertisers as a business model, but I was part of a company doing the important work of journalism. So what if I was on the advertising side of the business writing banner ads? It’s just that ... the editorial salaries were unlivable. And what was that scandal about the internship program that was shut down for paying nothing at all, not to mention the abusive working environment? I removed the rose-colored glasses, wiped the smudges on my designer sleeve. This was the publisher of the world’s premier fashion magazine, after all, and oops, I did ride the elevator with Ms. Wintour once, but to be fair I was already on the elevator when she stepped on. I didn’t step off.

Instead I changed jobs, swapping one legacy publisher for another. This company published one of the most influential news magazines in history.

It was an election year and a woman was running for president – she would be the first. Surely, things would get better. At my new job, I pitched big ideas for campaigns centering women who were boundary pushers making change, including a campaign to celebrate women who were first in their fields. I was asked by a male executive whether we really “needed” that. Two years after Hillary lost, that iconic news magazine was sold off to a private buyer, a literal billionaire.

TIME was the same magazine that ran the print Pull from Robert Rauschenberg’s 1974 Hoarfrost Series. The silkscreen on fabric, silk and cheesecloth (a signature layered technique of the artist) used two images without permission, and the photographer, Morton Beebe, sued in what was an early appropriation lawsuit.

## Social Media, Art, and the Ethics of Success in a Post-Internet Era

The work of Rauschenberg, currently on display across the city at the Guggenheim, Whitney and City Museum of New York, asks a question of etiquette: How does an artist conduct themselves once they become successful? How do they broker their power? In my fiction work, I write about what humans do with power. How it changes even the lowliest in the chain; how it changes the values of a person whose most important personal value was integrity. How easy it is to slide into a more comfortable position in life, (always and only) made possible by the exploitation of someone else. That’s the cost of existing in capitalism. And we are all guilty. So how do we – how does the artist – cause the least harm in a system designed to profit off creative labor, when we are the creatives?

At a fragile time for American art and freedom of speech in a volatile sociopolitical climate in the U.S. and global affairs, Rauschenberg’s Combines are metaphors at the intersection of the artist before and the artist after varying degrees of success, whether it’s art that challenges in the face of fascism or global domination in the most sinister ways through modes of technology, war and censorship. At the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, the works feature materials that were available to make art accessible when Rauschenberg was humbly repurposing canvases, materials and layering his Black and White Paintings series in 1970s New York.

What would Rauschenberg, an artist whose art was political commentary on many of our most urgent issues of today from war to journalism, make of the current state of media?

To bring light to Rauschenberg’s work, on display across New York in lieu of a retrospective, as Hilton Als laments for the New Yorker, the span of his work has to be pieced together by the viewer. Much like an artist’s career. And perhaps the lack of a retrospective that spans the life of Rauschenberg is an artist statement itself, or at least a state of affairs for working creatives in 2026 as content as currency careens toward artificial intelligence. What would Rauschenberg think of it all? It’s a worthy exercise to compare Rauschenberg’s mixed media prints as sociopolitical commentary to social media and evolving online formats in 2026. In Beebe v. Rauschenberg, Rauschenberg came in contact with the modern social-media equivalent of usage rights when he began incorporating news media and photographs by other artists into his work. From both ends, he found out the hard way that artists deserve to be paid for their work, both as a struggling artist sourcing what materials he could source, and later when he was commercially successful and was sued for using prints by another artist. The intersection makes Rauschenberg a contemporary at the center of the modern paradox of the artist: If you are not starving are you a sellout, and if you are profiting from your art, how can you support other artists once you find success? How can you hold the door open for the next artist?

The Rauschenberg Estate invited New School students for a tour of his estate for a taste of the open door Rauschenberg extended to many artists from the years of [1970-1990??]

Rauschenberg might be horrified to see the “combine” of privately owned journalism and tech, and what ChatGPT does to the value of the written word as it also does to the environment, with data centers consuming up to 842,000 tons of water a day for things like constructing a sentence that a writer could’ve been paid to write. Rauschenberg retired on Captiva, a remote island in Florida, where he witnessed in the 1970s the dwindling number of birds due to oil spills. Putting artists out of work and wasting water. Two birds; one stone.

After 15 years as a writer, I can offer just one writer’s account of what happens on both sides of “success.” When I was a successful working writer, I was making an income, not art. In my 10-year career as a copywriter full time, I can remember a handful of campaigns that seemed to posit the ethical-identity question: who are you, an honest person trying to make a living in the most expensive city in America in one of the worst-paying professions, or a sellout? Are you a writer or a sellout?

One campaign I was assigned while leading the food category was for a consumer food brand that was publicly anti-LGBTQ under the guise of being a “family brand.” I told my boss I would not be able to work on the campaign because they were anti-queer, and she looked quizzically at me. I felt like I couldn’t tell her I was a member of the community. I still think that was one of the demerits that led to my position being eliminated in a mass layoff.

That was years ago before I had a family of my own. I still flinch when I see the brand in the aisle where I buy my son’s pastina. Sometimes it’s the only brand that carries his favorite pasta, and I have to choose between integrity and a pasta shape that will cause a meltdown, when where we spend is one of our best tools against capitalism for evil.

The decisions we make shape the course of our lives. In my own, when I have spoken up, it has changed the course of my scope at work, led to jobs lost, a career altered, and financial impact that I never recouped. And still I chose to live by these principles, or at least allow them to guide me as best I can in a capitalist system that profits off the laborers. The creatives. The artists

Back at the company that owned TIME, I was laid off in a merger by the acquisition corporation that would later sell it off. My director role was “eliminated,” then quietly reposted at the manager level and backfilled by someone with less experience who would accept the same responsibilities for less pay. The idea I’d pitched that deemed unnecessary was executed by someone else. Journalism died that day for me. I stepped off the elevator of legacy media and wiped the stars from my eyes.

Now, I’m writing fiction in the MFA program at The New School. Sometimes it’s art that brings us closest to truth, and to change.