---
title: Blueprints for Belonging
author: Katie Pruden
editor: Kayley Cassidy
images: Katya Wack
web: Elijah Ager Luckett
---

While walking down Broadway in her neighborhood of South Williamsburg in 2021, architect Elsa Ponce noticed a line of women waiting for something. She figured they were queued up for the bus, but seeing them day after day, she got curious and finally asked. A woman in line told Ponce that this was La Parada, one of many “hiring corners” in the city for day laborers. This gathering spot, common across many corners of the city, was for women looking for domestic work. Sometimes, they would wait outside for hours before being hired. 

“It's public space that enables them to access jobs, but its informality creates a power imbalance,” said Ponce, whose architecture studio, Studio Ponce, works within the political, social, and environmental intersections of design. Gathering on a street corner, there were no guaranteed protections for these women, and that affected their livelihood. Ponce learned that the domestic workers would often experience wage theft and unsafe working conditions at the day jobs they picked up from strangers on the street. She wondered if there could be an intentionally designed space to support these workers and protect them from being exploited. 

At 365 Broadway, not far from La Parada, sits the Workers Justice Project (WJP), a nonprofit representing immigrants working in food-delivery driving, construction, and domestic work. Since 2010, WJP has been advocating for immigrant workers’ rights. Working out of their locations in Bushwick and Sunset Park, they’ve done so through the creation of three alliances: Construction Workers United, Liberty Cleaners, and Los Deliveristas Unidos. 

Groups like WJP have long recognized the challenges that immigrant workers face, and their need for a third space, which is crucial to organizing for better working conditions and fostering cultural care. Through one of the women at La Parada, Ponce was introduced to WJP founders Ligia Guallpa and Yadira Sánchez. At the time, the nonprofit was organizing their newest alliance, Los Deliveristas Unidos, and needed an improved, specialized space for these delivery workers to assemble. “We saw the opportunity of the workers’ center as something that could centralize services and infrastructure for more industries,” said Ponce. 

Though WJP had two physical spaces already, they had never worked with a designer before. Collaborating with Ponce, WJP, and workers from the alliances, they created the idea for the first “worker hub,” a renovated, intentionally designed community space for their three divisions of workers. After observing the ways the previous space was used, the design choices were based on the needs of WJP’s programming.

“It had to allow for so many things,” Ponce said. “We envisioned a space that can transform in different ways and be responsive to many needs. Having a space for assembling, not just as a training or orientation space, but as a celebration space. Or a space of emergency.”

Four years later, with a grant from the Architectural League of New York, WJP opened two renovated worker hubs in South Williamsburg and South Slope. The new South Slope location caters mostly to construction workers and acts as a hiring hall for those both seeking work and offering jobs. The South Williamsburg location is geared more toward the domestic workers and deliveristas, providing services such as cleaning certification and organizing meetings. 

Inside the hubs, the small team of staff offers support to those dropping by with questions about lawyers, immigration assistance, and insurance, often connecting them to other local services. Through their brick-and-mortar locations, they also offer a variety of in-person services such as OSHA safety training, English courses, and résumé building workshops. 

Not only do the hubs provide basic, necessary services, but they also serve as space for connection outside the workplace and home. Armary Perez is the Construction Workers United (CWU) Director at WJP. She’s been assisting with the daily services at WJP for seven years. “When people [immigrate] here, they think, ‘I’m going to forget everything. I’m new here and willing to do a lot of things.’ But they forget about their backgrounds and we want to give that back and make them grow as leaders as well,” said Perez. 

The infrastructure of WJP’s previous Sunset Park location had been crumbling and their landlord wasn’t doing anything to fix it. “With that space falling apart, it wasn’t welcoming. We wanted a space where the community can feel comfortable. Get a cup of tea with a nice view, get warm,” said Perez.

The hubs are designed like an open room, featuring bright, floor-to-ceiling windows. A horseshoe of desks fill the majority of the space, where the friendly team is usually working behind a computer or helping someone from the community. Near the door, there are plush chairs to enjoy while filling out paperwork or taking a call. Along the freshly painted white walls are printer-paper flyers for upcoming events, like worker safety trainings or English courses. Professional yet DIY, the minimalistic design and use of open space is meant to encourage participation. The office is activated by community use.

At its core, the design reflects values of transparency and collaboration as an antithesis to the hiring corner in Bushwick. From a design standpoint, the windows were the most important feature in choosing this space. Ponce said that immigrant workers “have felt invisible because there hasn't been an emphasis on this type of space.” At a time in this country when it is dangerous to even be seen as an immigrant, this space offers people pride instead of fear.

“The work that happens both in the centers and outside in the streets has been really critical to win major policy battles,” Ponce said.  “I think about the work that WJP was doing even before I became involved. Having a space was important to shaping those relationships and starting those conversations that led to winning these battles and the advocacy work.” In 2023, WJP successfully fought to pass the first legislation legalizing minimum pay for delivery drivers––which in a 2023 report by WJP was revealed to be the most dangerous job in the city, surpassing construction.

Since opening the space, WJP has been organizing with the workers of Indian Spice, a restaurant in Park Slope, to take action against the wage theft they had been suffering for months. The workers were collectively owed more than $3 million and filed a complaint with the city. In December, the NYS Department of Labor issued an order to Indian Spice to comply, marking a major win for these restaurant workers. 

La Parada, among many other informal hiring corners, still exists in the city. WJP is not looking to replace them but rather offer a helping hand to a community of people that has been often overlooked. According to a report by the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs, over 210,000 people from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa have immigrated to the city since 2022. WJP is looking to expand their services to meet their needs, but one of their biggest challenges is trying to help others with a language barrier. Perez said, “Before, it was mostly Spanish. But now, it’s French, Portuguese, Bengali, and Mandarin.” To accommodate, they have been using translation services and some staff members have been learning new languages. Perez embraces the task: “It's a challenge, but it's a really good challenge.”

At WJP’s newly designed worker hubs, small features—like windows or bathrooms—are building blocks for cultural and political empowerment. [[Left: Designed by and for immigrant workers in the city, the centers work to redistribute the power imbalance perpetuated by invisibility, street corners, and silence, and offer it back to the community through thoughtful sites of services. ]]
  
